Transcriber: David Hsu
Reviewer: Denise RQ
Music isn't music
until your brain makes it so.
Sounds can be noise in one context
and music in another.
We can all tell when someone is
speaking vs. when they're singing,
but as Diana Deutsch discovered
if you take a spoken sentence,
pull out a phrase, repeat that phrase
over and over and over again,
it will begin to sound musical.
Then, if you listen
to the entire sentence again,
it will sound as if the person
bursts into song
when he or she gets to the repeated part.
But the sounds reaching your ear
are the same in all of those cases;
what's changed is your brain.
How the brain turns sound into music
remains one of the greatest
mysteries of neuroscience.
The vast majority of us
love some kind of music;
If you don't, you are very rare
and scientists will want to study you.
We call you a person with "amusia"
- a cool new name.
We don't all love the same music.
Personally, I'm not
a huge fan of smooth jazz,
and you might not like opera.
This characteristic of music,
the fact that it's universally loved,
but highly subjective,
has ensured
that it continues to baffle us.
We all need certain things
to survive and reproduce:
food, water, sex.
Our minds have evolved in such a way
that when we don't have those things,
we seek them out.
They become enjoyable;
we call them "biological reinforcers."
But music is just a bunch
of sounds strung together,
it doesn't provide us
with the essential nutrients;
it doesn't bind to our neurons
the way drugs do;
it doesn't ensure that our genes live on
although that might be debatable.
Why do we love music?
It's a question I've struggled to answer,
and I can't promise you
a full, complete solution today,
but I like to share with you
some of the scientific insights
that had made me a better musician,
and some of the artistic insights
I hope will help neuroscientists
solve this mystery.
I come from a family of physicians:
two anesthesiologists,
a gastroenterologist,
a generalist, an orthopedic surgeon,
an ophthalmic surgeon, and an ER doctor.
Thanksgiving dinner at our house
is the safest place to be
outside of the hospital.
(Laughter)
so I can't guarantee it's the most fun.
Then there is my mother;
she is a conductor,
much to my two-year old son's dismay,
not of the locomotive kind
but very much of the music kind.
Growing up, I saw how difficult it is
to make a living as a musician
in a society where music is universally
loved but hopelessly undervalued.
She works long hours,
she still sacrifices every holiday,
and there is a part of her
that never stops wondering
what people thought
of her last performance.
If you count up all the awards,
the recognitions, and distinctions,
she's by far, the most
successful member of our family,
but she certainly wouldn't think so.
Not that being a doctor
isn't stressful - it is -
but at the end of the day,
you've spent your time trying
to extend or enhance a person's life,
and who can argue the value of that?
So when it was my turn to decide
what to do with my professional life,
the choice seemed pretty straight forward:
go to medical school,
and in your free time, continue up
your musical training.
But then I watched my brother trained
to become an orthopedic surgeon,
and I realized there is no such thing
as free time in med school
and especially in the years that follow.
I didn't want to give up the most
important years of my vocal training.
I also couldn't see
how I could support myself and pay
for those expensive singing lessons
if I didn't have some other way
to make money.
So I turned to neuroscience.
To me, it was the a perfect blend
of science and poetry.
Like pretty much every other
neuroscientist of my generation,
I devoured the writings of Oliver Sacks;
I studied topics
like autobiographical memory,
analogical reasoning, creativity.
So you'd think then I'd turn to science
to help me become a better musician.
After all, if I was using science
to understand something
as elusive as insight,
wouldn't it make sense to turn there
to learn the things that I loved?
But the truth is the more I looked
at anatomical drawings
of the larynx, the tongue,
and the diaphragm,
the less I felt I understood
about my instrument;
I couldn't see
how knowing what parts of the brain
were active or even enhanced in musicians
would make me sing better.
For a while, I even tried very hard
to give up singing,
because, after all, there are
so many great singers in the world.
We all need to get
one-on-one care from a physician,
but many hundreds of thousands of us
can be moved by the same musician.
So wouldn't I, and maybe the world, be
better off if I stuck to medical research?
The problem was that the more time I let
elapse between singing engagements,
the more I felt there was something
really important missing from my life.
The more I felt that I couldn't be
the person I needed to be,
I became moody, irritable,
a little irrational, often mean;
and I found too often I would cap off
a difficult day in the lab
with a martini or two
and an hour of self-loathing.
So when I finished my neuroscience PhD,
I decided to dedicate myself
full time to music;
I enrolled in a Master's of Music program.
Classical musical training
follows the apprenticeship model
where you study with one
or two teachers for many years
until you can produce the sounds
that you hear in your imagination
on your instrument.
But the one thing that kept gnawing at me
over and over again
was how little neuroscience
had trickled down into this model.
After all, most of the techniques
are built upon
performing the same exercises
over and over and over again,
often, in the same way, everyday;
until you build those skills.
To demonstrate this, I want to introduce
to you one of my favorite collaborators,
Keisuke Nakagoshi.
(Applause)
Keisuke is going to give us an example
of what a typical piano training
exercise sounds like.
(Piano music starts)
(Piano music ends)
Over and over and over again!
But the truth is if you want
to take what you're learning,
what you're developing in that skill,
and apply it to any piece of music,
research in motor learning suggests
that you should in fact interleave
and space out your trials
introducing some randomness
- what we call "desirable difficulties."
There is even a study of pianists
demonstrating this effect,
but so many teachers
have never heard of such a thing.
So then I began to wonder,
"What would happen
if I actually try it on myself?"
as most scientists
use themselves as guinea pigs,
and I found that I started
to improve much more rapidly.
So I developed a course
called Training the Musical Brain;
how to use neuroscience to develop
more effective practice strategies
which I now teach at the Conservatory
of Music here in San Francisco.
I started to wonder,
"Are there other ways
that science can make me a better musician
that I couldn't see ten years ago?"
When I was a child,
I remember one of my evaluations
at the Royal Conservatory of Music;
it'll always stick with me.
I was a kid, I sang all my pieces well,
I didn't make any mistakes,
the judges said my tone was very good,
I had good technique,
but my performance was deemed "unmusical."
I was devastated.
How could these judges
gauge my musicality?
Couldn't they see that I feel
and understand this music deeply?
But the truth is feeling the music
and producing music other people feel
are two different skills.
In the rehearsal room,
I can cry as much as I need to
when my character is dying,
but when I get on stage,
it's your time to cry not mine.
So what could science tell me about that?
That's when my two worlds collided;
because after all, art and science
are after the same thing:
the goal is to understand
the human experience.
Science does it by extracting
general principles about the world,
and art uses individual experience
to highlight what's universal.
So here is what I learned in a nutshell:
your brain is primed
to search for meaning,
for patterns, in a random, chaotic world.
We look for these things everywhere,
and we've evolved in such a way
that it's enjoyable
when we make a new connection,
when we learn something new,
when we understand something meaningful.
We find pleasure in it.
We see things that are meaningful to us
even when they are not there.
We see faces everywhere;
they are important to us.
We anthropomorphize
or attribute human-like traits
to our pets, or cars, or digital devices.
When we hear repeated sounds,
and we know what they mean,
we call it music.
Speech becomes song just by repetition.
In fact, repetition
is the one quality of music
that seems to be common
across all cultures and genres,
even in the one genre
in which it's explicitly avoided
- we call this classical contemporary
music composition."
Elizabeth Margulis found
if you artificially insert
repetition into these pieces,
people find them more enjoyable,
more interesting, more likely to be rated
as having been composed
by a human being rather than a computer.
Why?
Because repetition signals intention,
it frames the pattern,
it shows you that there is something
meaningful here to listen to.
But that's not enough
to explain a human obsession.
After all, music can cause riots,
topple governments,
raise the hairs on the back of your neck.
What can science tell us about that?
It turns out that when your brain
is enjoying a piece of music
that might even give you the chills,
it's awash with a neurotransmitter
called dopamine.
Dopamine, despite its widespread fame,
has actually been undersold in many ways;
people think of it
as the "pleasure chemical,"
but that's not all it does.
A better term for it
is the "salience chemical,"
because it's awash
in some parts of your brain
when you're trying to hold
important things in mind,
when you're nauseated,
when you want something,
when there is a meaning to be found.
The way that dopamine's awash in the brain
while you're getting the chills from music
is very specific
to when and where it happens.
There's a paper from Robert Zatorre's lab
at McGill with Valorie Salimpoor,
the first author
that documents these changes
and showed me, finally,
what it means to be musical.
Even as a master's student, I self-doubted
my ability to sing musically;
it was a bit like being cool:
everyone seemed to know
what it was and how to do it,
but if you even asked the question,
it showed that you weren't cool.
I guess the fact
I turned to science for help
puts the nail in the coffin
of my coolness.
(Laughter)
Even though in the practice room,
I'd spend almost all my time
perfecting my high notes,
after all, that's what gets you hired.
They come at the climax of the piece;
they get the biggest reaction
from the audience;
and if you screw them up,
they are the most memorable.
But my singing teacher would say to me,
"It's all the notes
that are leading up to the high note
that are more important
than the high note,
and that's what you should practice."
I understood that
from a technical perspective
but not from a musical one
until I read the Salimpoor paper.
In the Salimpoor paper, they show
that there are two regions of the brain
that mediate getting the chills from music
and they tracked dopamine
in these regions.
They are the caudate
and the nucleus accumbens.
You can think of the caudate
as your parent:
it tells you that your behavior
has consequences,
it tracks how the things that you see,
hear, observe, and do have outcomes;
it sets up the expectation of a reward
of pleasure and ensures, in the future,
you will behave in such a way
that you will seek reward
and avoid the things
that led to punishment.
The caudate is awash with dopamine
when you are leading up
to the special moment
that will give you the chills.
But when you get to the moment
that give you the chills,
there is a dopamine spike
in your nucleus accumbens.
Your nucleus accumbens is your BFF,
it's your best friend for life,
because more dopamine
in the nucleus accumbens
correlates with a bigger high.
In the 1950s,
Olds and Milner stuck electrodes
into the nucleus accumbens
of a bunch of rats.
Then, they taught those rats
to press the lever;
and every time they pressed the lever,
they'd get a little electric current
that stimulates their nucleus accumbens.
Those rats wanted nothing more
than to press that lever.
One rat pressed it
7,500 times in 12 hours,
suggesting that it would starve
rather than stop pressing.
The nucleus accumbens likes,
but the caudate wants.
The intensity of the chills
that you feel from music depends
on how much dopamine there is
in your nucleus accumbens,
but the number of times you get the chills
or, if you get them at all, depends
on the amount of dopamine
in your caudate.
That's what I learned,
that's what it means to be musical.
You need to set up
the musical intention for your audience
so that they will pay attention,
so that the caudate will know
that there is a reward to be had,
and we better pay attention.
Then, as a musician,
you use all kinds of tools,
once you've set up the tension,
to delay it, to delay the release.
There's all kinds of music tools
you can use to increase the desire,
the expectation,
the motivation for the reward,
because, after all,
pleasure is the death of desire.
But the more desire there is,
the better the pleasure.
That's what I learned.
So let me demonstrate to you
this little theory in practice.
One of my favorite opera
is "La Traviata" by Verdi.
It tells the story of a Parisian
courtesan, a high class prostitute,
who is dying of tuberculosis,
as lots of sopranos do.
(Laughter)
She is entertaining a lavish party
because she's giving everybody pleasure.
That's what she does for a living,
she gives pleasure,
and she gets exhausted by the party;
but at the party, she meets this young man
who has been sitting outside her window
while she was ill, unable to give pleasure
when all her friends had abandoned her,
and he was waiting for her
because he really loved her.
And now, alone in her room, she wonders,
"What would it be like to feel true love?"
"What is this mysterious thing,
this pulse of the universe?"
She realizes
that it's a double-edged sword,
that love is both torture and delight,
(Italian) "croce e delizia."
That's the intention I want
to communicate to you, musically,
because, of course, the idea is
much more complicated than we can say.
In order to do that,
I'll first sing a repeat
of what the tenor's saying
earlier in the act.
Clever Verdi!
We like things better
the second time around; repetition.
Then I will set up the expectation,
I'll tell you straight off,
there will be a high note
- Setting that up? -
but I will delay that high note
as long as possible
to increase your motivation
to get dopamine into your caudates,
so that by the time we relax that tension,
there is a dopamine spike
in your nucleus accumbens.
(Laughter)
(Piano music starts)
(Singing)
(Singing and piano music end)
(Applause)